docs: Add DR about release workflows refactor (#1521)
eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc: docs/development/decision-records/2024-08-28-Release-Workflow-Refactor/README.md

# Refactor of the Release Workflow

## Decision

> Refactor the existing workflows to accommodate the release of bugfix versions as described in [this](../2024-07-18-Improvements-versioning-scheme/README.md) decision record:

Reviewer: minor nit: I would phrase this as "the existing workflows will be refactored to...."

> - Remove the releases and release/X.Y.Z branches in favor of using just the main branch and tags.

Reviewer: this will not work for subsequent bugfixes: imagine we have a `0.8.1` and then need to create a `0.8.2`. What would `0.8.2` branch off of?

Author: The 0.8.1 tag? Sorry, i'm not understanding the issue.

Reviewer: yeah, sorry, took a mental cul-de-sac :/

- Change the draft-new-release and publish-new-release to enable hotfix releases

## Rationale

> As of this decision record creation date, the release of a new version is triggered with the execution of the `draft-new-release` workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the release of a new version is triggered by the execution of the `draft-new-release` workflow.
```

> The workflow branches from main and checks out into a `release/*` branch where a new commit to represent the releasable state is created. Afterward a PR is created to merge the release/X.Y.Z branch into `releases`.

Reviewer: I think it's not really necessary to fully explain the current state of affairs. Better to briefly highlight the pain-points

Author: I'll be brief next time.

Once the PR is approved and merged, the `publish-new-release` workflow is automaticaly triggered to run the required steps in order to publish all artifacts
in their desired repositories/platforms. With the successful publication of said artifacts, the head of the `releases` branch is merged back into `main` 
to keep the integrity of the commit tree. Finally, the current project version is automatically bumped to the next minor version in a new commit to `main` 
to kickstart the next development cycle.

> As they stand, the current release workflows don't allow the release of bugfix versions since:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As they stand, the current release workflows don't allow the release of bugfix versions because:
```

- the `draft-new-release` workflow doesn't create any bugfix branch;
- even if the branch is manually created, merging it to `releases` via PR to trigger the `publish-new-release` workflow, is not possible;
- The `publish-new-release` workflow can't be manually triggered;
- Even if it could be manually triggered, there are steps that shouldn't apply for bugfix releases such as bumping the project version or merging to main;

## Approach

> The draft-new-release workflow should include one extra inputs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `draft-new-release` workflow should include one extra input:
```

> - A `choice` input to allow the distinction between a release or bugfix.

Reviewer: "choice" is really misleading and I think we don't need it. Why not derive the type (hotfix vs release) from the `version` input? if it matches `hotfix/x.y.z` (or `bugfix/`...) it's a hotfix, otherwise it's a release

Github Actions Jobs and Step conditionals are then used to make the execution follow the required steps, as follows.

### Prepare Release workflow logic

> - Triggers manually. Input is the version, choice and base ref (should be either commit from main or tag)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Triggers manually. Takes the version (including possible prefix) and base ref (should be either commit from main or tag)
```
I don't see the value in being able to branch off of a commit SHA. Releases are always created off of `main`, and bugfixes are always created off of a branch. Accepting that, we can omit the `baseRef` input, because when manually triggering the WF, one can select the branch or tag which is used as base-ref.

- if choice is release
  - branches from main into `release/<input_version>`
- if choice is bugfix
  - branches from tag into `bugfix/<input_version>`
- replaces the project default version `(gradle.properties)` with the workflow version input
- replaces openapi spec version
- replaces charts version and README

> - commits and pushes to `release/*` or `bugfix/X.Y.Z` branch

Reviewer: lets keep it consistent:
```suggestion
- commits and pushes to `release/<input_version>` or `bugfix/<input_version>` branch
```

Author: Releases can be "X.Y.Z" or "X.Y.Z-rcX", while bugfixes can only be "X.Y.Z".
That's the reason why I wanted to separate.

- if new release

>    - opens PR with new `release/*` branch as head and `main/` as base

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - opens PR with new `release/<input_version>` branch as head and `main/` as base
```

Then, a different process takes places if we intend to release a latest version or a bugfix. 

### Case for latest releases

> After the prepare release PR is approved, merging into main will trigger the publish-release workflow where the required publication steps will take place, as shown in [Publish release workflow logic](#publish-release-workflow-logic).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the prepare release PR is approved, merging into `main` will trigger the `publish-release` workflow where the required publication steps will take place, as shown in [Publish release workflow logic](#publish-release-workflow-logic).
```

### Case for bugfix Releases

> After the bugfix branch is created, developers commit the fix or set of fixes to it via PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the bugfix branch is created, developers commit the fix or set of fixes to it via PRs.
```

> The release of the bugfix version should be triggered manually through the publishing workflow and should execute most of the publication steps as a normal release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release of the bugfix version should be triggered manually through the publishing workflow and executes most of the publication steps of a normal release, except:
```

> However, for a bugfix release, the workflow shouldn't:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> - Make any commits to the main branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create any commits to the main branch
```

- Bump the project version to the next minor version

### Publish release workflow logic

> - Triggers automatically when prepare release PR is merged into main from `release/*` branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Triggers automatically when prepare release PR is merged into `main` from `release/<input_version>` branch
```

- Triggers manually only from branch `bugfix/X.Y.Z`

- Extracts release version from `gradle.properties`
- Triggers release to maven repository by calling `trigger-maven-publish.yaml`
- Triggers docker image publishing by calling `trigger-maven-publish.yaml`
- Releases helm-charts
- Creates Github Tag and Release

> - if PR was merged to main it means a new release then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if PR was merged to `main` it means a new release then:
```

> - if PR was merged to main it means a new release then:

Reviewer: I think that it's better to create a new workflow `publish-new-hotfix`, that only triggers manually and lacks the steps to bump versions, etc.

My reasoning is that I find it a bit sketchy to parse the head ref in the workflow, and only perform these tasks when the head ref starts with `release`

Author: This would mean to have duplicate workflows with minor changes between them. I would prefer to parse the head ref instead as its simple to.

Reviewer: to avoid code duplication, commonalities could be extracted into a re-usable workflow, which then gets parameterized. but having explicit workflows for release and bugfix has advantages:
- less error prone
- possibility to assign individual triggers and guards (e.g. disallowing releases on refs other than `main`)
- individual WF names: useful if another WF should be triggered after this WF (`workflow_run` trigger)

Author: Ok, i see.
Let me know what you think of these changes: [8013954](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1521/commits/801395426b870ac9c902ca16400b14d26a2b9950)

   - Updates project version to next version, commits and pushes to main
      - if final version, increments to next minor version and adds "-SNAPSHOT"
      - if not final version (e.g.-rc1), do not increment
- _(elif PR was merged to hotfix then don't increment)_
- Publishes to Swaggerhub by calling `publish-swaggerhub.yaml`
- Publishes OpenAPI UI spec to Github Pages by calling `publish-openapi-ui.yml`

## Other Considerations

> - Keeping `release/*` branches is no longer needed since the tag references the commit on main.

Reviewer: we actually have `release/<input_version>` branches, and a `releases/` branch. will both get :axe:'d?
Also, probably worth mentioning, that `bugfix/` branches will indeed stay, for later subsequent bugfixes.

At that point, I would not be opposed to also keep the `release/` branches around, simply for consistency's sake.

Author: I'd remove the `release/<input_version>` as well since we have the tags. I see no reason to keep both.

- Release candidates should be handled the same using the same process as a latest release.
- Release workflows should not run on forks.
- Should be possible to trigger the publishing of snapshots manually from main or bugfix branches.
- `draft-new-release` workflow could be named to `manual-release-draft`.
- `publish-new-release` workflow could be named `release`.

> 

Reviewer: a new workflow `publish-new-hotfix` will be required

Once the PR is approved and merged, the `publish-new-release` workflow is automaticaly triggered to run the required steps in order to publish all artifacts
in their desired repositories/platforms. With the successful publication of said artifacts, the head of the `releases` branch is merged back into `main` 
to keep the integrity of the commit tree. Finally, the current project version is automatically bumped to the next minor version in a new commit to `main` 
to kickstart the next development cycle.

As they stand, the current release workflows don't allow the release of bugfix versions since:
- the `draft-new-release` workflow doesn't create any bugfix branch;
- even if the branch is manually created, merging it to `releases` via PR to trigger the `publish-new-release` workflow, is not possible;
- The `publish-new-release` workflow can't be manually triggered;
- Even if it could be manually triggered, there are steps that shouldn't apply for bugfix releases such as bumping the project version or merging to main;

## Approach

The draft-new-release workflow should include two extra inputs:

> - A `choice` input to allow the distinction between a release or bugfix.

Author: Though about this as well. Having to set the input would make the process more transparent for anyone using it and that is the only reason I added it like this. I'm fine with both ways.

> - A `choice` input to allow the distinction between a release or bugfix.

Reviewer 2: I think having both could be more prone-error, also because afaik the workflow dispatch input cannot be a "select" between two choice but just an open string. 
A sort of "documentation" can be added to the description of the `version` input to warn who's releasing that if the branch is main this will be a proper release, bugfix otherwise.

> - A `choice` input to allow the distinction between a release or bugfix.

Author: Just fyi, you can actually have a choice input between two specific options:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb04d749-9a6e-4f4a-a34e-6483457aa4a3)

However thinking more about it having the choice doesn't add any more benefits than the one i mentioned above, which a better description on the manual input window would suffice. I'll remove the choice thing.

> - A `choice` input to allow the distinction between a release or bugfix.

Reviewer 2: cool! I wasn't aware, thanks for the hint

> - The commit that will be used to branch the release of (ideally should be head of main or a tag)

Author: [5993050](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1521/commits/599305051b1077b53c9e25b2913a9c631096f267)

Github Actions Jobs and Step conditionals are then used to make the execution follow the required steps, as follows.

### Prepare Release workflow logic
- Triggers manually. Input is the version, choice and base branch
- if choice is release
  - branches from main into `release/<input_version>`
- if choice is bugfix
  - branches from tag into `bugfix/<input_version>`
- replaces the project default version `(gradle.properties)` with the workflow version input
- replaces openapi spec version
- replaces charts version and README
- commits and pushes to `release/*` or `bugfix/X.Y.Z` branch
- if new release
   - opens PR with new `release/*` branch as head and `main/` as base

Then, a different process takes places if we intend to release a latest version or a bugfix. 

### Case for latest releases
After the prepare release PR is approved, merging into main will trigger the publish-release workflow where the required publication steps will take place, as shown in [Publish release workflow logic](#publish-release-workflow-logic).

### Case for bugfix Releases

> After the bugfix branch is created, developers commit the fix or set of fixes to it, either via direct push or PR.

Author: [5993050](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1521/commits/599305051b1077b53c9e25b2913a9c631096f267)

The release of the bugfix version should be triggered manually through the publishing workflow and should execute most of the publication steps as a normal release.
However, for a bugfix release, the workflow shouldn't:
- Make any commits to the main branch
- Bump the project version to the next minor version

### Publish release workflow logic
- Triggers automatically when prepare release PR is merged into main from `release/*` branch
- Triggers manually only from branch `bugfix/X.Y.Z`

> - Extracts release version from `release/*` or `bugfix/X.Y.Z` branches

Reviewer 2: version should be already set in the `gradle.properties` file, no need to extract it from the branch name

Author: Agree. It should be extracted and provided as job output anyway because it's used in many other places.

- Triggers release to maven repository by calling `trigger-maven-publish.yaml`
- Triggers docker image publishing by calling `trigger-maven-publish.yaml`
- Releases helm-charts
- Creates Github Tag and Release
- if PR was merged to main it means a new release then:
   - Updates project version to next version, commits and pushes to main

>       - if final version, increments to next patch version and adds "-SNAPSHOT"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - if final version, increments to next minor version and adds "-SNAPSHOT"
```

Author: [5993050](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1521/commits/599305051b1077b53c9e25b2913a9c631096f267)

      - if not final version (e.g.-rc1), do not increment
- _(elif PR was merged to hotfix then don't increment)_
- Publishes to Swaggerhub by calling `publish-swaggerhub.yaml`
- Publishes OpenAPI UI spec to Github Pages by calling `publish-openapi-ui.yml`

## Other Considerations

- Keeping `release/*` branches is no longer needed since the tag references the commit on main.
- Release candidates should be handled the same using the same process as a latest release.
- Release workflows should not run on forks.
- Should be possible to trigger the publishing of snapshots manually from main or bugfix branches.

> - `draft-new-release` workflow could be named to `manual-release-draft`.

Reviewer 2: it could be called `draft-release`, no need to specify `manual` as it's kinda implicit

Author: Sugested to name it like that because of what is stated in [this](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/issues/1445) issue:
_"workflows, that are intended for manual-only tasks should be prefixed manual-, e.g. manual-docker-publish.yaml instead of publish-docker.yaml"_

Reviewer: those are workflows, that only do part of a thing, such as publishing docker images. The statement in the issue could have been clearer, sorry.
sometimes manual WFs come in handy, but I agree with @ndr-brt that the actual draft-release workflow does not need it.

> - `publish-new-release` workflow could be named `publish-release`.

Reviewer 2: maybe just `release` would be simpler, the publication of the artifacts is a consequence.

Author: [c0d45d1](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/tractusx-edc/pull/1521/commits/c0d45d12e86a76207c56929d4d27ea8ef65be6e9)
